GAME MAPS
Overworld maps contain the main game. Actual tiles can be created by a freeware, cross-platform tool called Tiled.
Maps must also contain an information XML, which is what they are referenced by in the engine.

MAP INFORMATION
The map information file contains everything about the map that isn't tiles.
The root tag, <map>, contains these attributes:
id: internal map id
tiles: path to the tiles file

The map file also contains other varieties of tags.

THE <wild> TAG
Contains information about wild pokemon data. Since this feature isn't really done, no documentation is available yet.

THE <object> TAG
Represents an object on the map. All objects have three mandatory attributes:
id: the object's internal ID. Note that this MUST(!!!) be unique across all maps. If it is not, objects with the same ID will share saved data.
type: the object's type as detailed below
pos: the object's position, in tiles, in x,y form

OBJECT TYPES
There are many object types. A brief summary is available here. Please look in the objects/ directory for more detail.

sign: A sign! Displays text.
warp: A warp! Used to connect maps together.
npc: A character in the game.
trainer: A special variety of npc that can be fought.
scriptarea: Executes a script when the area is stepped on

CREATING A MAP
This is information on settings for creating a map tile file with Tiled.
1. Open up tiled
2. First, ensure that the correct output mode is set. Go to Preferences -> General and ensure that "Store tile layer data as:" is set to "Base64 (zlib compressed".
3. To create your map, select File -> New... . In the map creation dialog, set the orientation to Orthogonal, the tile size to 16x16 pixels, and the map size to whatever you want then press ok.

Your map must have two specific layers, as follows:
1. It must have an object layer. This can be anything, but it is the plane objects will be drawn on.
2. It must have a collisions layer. This is a tile layer named "Collisions" (without quotes, spelling and caps matter!) and is where collision information is stored. You must draw on it using tilesets/maptypetileset.png

Other than those, any number of layers can be used and they will be drawn in the order specified.

Note that for the engine to work correctly, the map can only exist in the maps/ folder and can only reference tileset images in the tilesets/ folder.

COLLISION DATA
The collisions layer contains tiles from the map type tileset. Each has a code on it to represent the type of tile and its effect.
No tile: the tile has no special properties
C: tile is solid and cannot be walked through
W: tile is water, interacting with it will cause surf message and movement into water.
G: tile is grass, pokemon can be encountered
DG: tile is double grass, pokemon can be encountered